(upbeat music)
- What's good everyone,
welcome back to the Strong Sisters YouTube channel.
In today's video, we have the pleasure and the honor
of having Dr. Raymond Peat on our channel
to discuss his views of nutrition and wellness.
So Dr. Ray Peat got his PhD in biology
from the University of Oregon.
He specialized in physiology
and he's interested in topics such as aging,
nutrition and hormones.
So Dr. Ray Peat is just a little ball of information.
He has dedicated so many hours to independent research
and he puts all of this information online for free
for our benefit.
He's not backed by anything
and he's not trying to sell you anything.
- That's one of the main reasons why we appreciate
Dr. Ray Peat, he's not backed by any funding agency,
he's not trying to sell you any supplements or programs.
Instead he's just really interested in this
and his views are likely going to challenge
many of your views and I think that that's a good practice,
a good activity that we should all do every once in a while
to really challenge our beliefs
'cause that way we can grow and evolve.
So we are not saying that his claims are 100% right,
you're not going to agree with every individual
on certain things.
But Dr. Ray Peat discusses some nutritional strategies
or like principles and many people have kind of taken
these principles and formulated what's called
like a Ray Peat diet.
And so this diet can kind of be summarized by,
he believes that we should be carb fueled
with easy to digest carbs
and that you will get your nutrients in
from animal products.
So we have definitely incorporated some of these principles
into our diet a few months ago
when we started to add carbs back in
and it has worked well for us.
However, just a reminder,
there are no absolutes in the nutrition world,
we are all very different and so you have to experiment
to find what works best for you.
So this conversation is just presenting
another unique perspective on nutrition
and we hope you enjoy.
So with all that said, Dr. Ray Peat,
didn't zoom us.
So we called his landline and therefore this video
is an hour and a half of our video.
So like us, you get to see us reacting and typing
and then just like a cute voice.
And so we-- - We enjoy that.
- Can only call his landline, he is 84 years old
but can just bring up studies off the top of his head,
which speaks of his intelligence.
And we polled many people on Instagram
and so these questions are just from the Instagram questions
we did not get to all of them,
but hopefully we can have him on our channel again.
So if you guys have any more additional questions,
make sure you hit him in the comments below
and hopefully we can get him on if he doesn't hate us too much
I don't know, we'll see.
- He's great you guys, he's seriously so nice.
- So fun.
All right, well hope you guys enjoy this video.
We have polled our audience for some questions
and then we also have some questions ourselves
that are kind of divided into some different topics
to just keep it organized.
We're gonna talk about like nutrition stuff,
weight loss, hormones, fertility, supplements
and we'll just kind of see where the conversation goes
if that's okay with you.
- That's fine.
- Okay, cool.
A lot of people are confused about
what they should be eating these days.
So we have all like keto, carnivore, different diets.
If it were up to you, what are about five to 10
essential food items that you would recommend
somebody includes in their diet?
- Special food items?
- Just like--
- Essential.
- So kind of the most, the food that people
should prioritize they eat regularly.
- It really depends a lot on your situation.
But very, very safe and highly nutritious foods
are convenient as well as safe in the long run.
Those include milk, cheese without additives,
eggs, low starch fruits, generally meat and fish
that are not high in polyunsaturated fats.
And depending on your ability to digest food
well cooked vegetables are very good for most people.
What I've left out are mostly grains, legumes
and other seed related parts such as nuts.
- Yeah, would you say that the nuts and the seeds
and the legumes you're not incorporating
because of the PFAS?
- Not just that but plants put, they create a storage form
of nutrients to support the embryos development
and those nutrients have to be in insoluble form
so they don't wash away while the seed is waiting
to germinate.
They have to be mobilized in an organized way.
And those preparations for the nutrients
for the seed embryo go with specific defenses
against those same nutrients being used by predators
such as mammals that would eat their seeds
or worms, insects, fungus and so on.
So they have essentially pesticides or insecticides
incorporated into the seed chemistry.
They put their most special blockers of digestion
and basically neurotoxins and digestive toxins
into the seed as self defense because the seed
is the essential most important part of the plant.
The plant can grow new leaves if a predator eats them
but the seed is the long term existence of the plant.
So the worst toxins as far as animals are concerned
are in the seeds.
- They gotta protect their babies.
- Yeah.
- So can you expand a little bit on PFAS?
So beyond nuts and seeds, just how you view PFAS
influence cells and how they can cause insulin resistance?
- Yeah, cold organisms have to, besides surviving the winter
which cold storage is very good for a seed to survive
and insects and fish and other cold blood organisms,
frogs for example, can stand to be even frozen
but they can live daily life at a very low temperature
close to freezing.
And so those organisms are seed when it is ready
to germinate in the spring for example
when it's still very cold in the northern climate.
They have to mobilize their enzymes.
There has to be mobility in the seed cells
and a fish or an insect naturally has to move
even when it's very cold.
And saturated fats harden at a very moderate temperature.
If you put butter in the icebox it becomes very hard.
Even olive oil solidifies in the refrigerator.
And so an animal or a plant living in the north
at a low temperature simply can't survive
if it has saturated fats for its energy storage.
And so in proportion to the coldness of the climate
they remove hydrogens from the fats
making them liquid at cold temperature.
But the degree of unsaturation or removal of hydrogens
to make them liquid oils in the cold
makes them highly oxidizable.
And if you increase the temperature of a fish for example
at human temperature 98 degrees a fish very quickly stinks.
And if you put highly unsaturated seed oil or fish oil
if you raise it to even room temperature
or body temperature in the 90 degrees Fahrenheit range
they will quickly start to harden.
The oxidation spreads and hardens them into solid masses.
So if an organism is going to live outside
of that cold environment they have to get rid
of the polyunsaturated fats.
And the warmer the environment is the more saturated
their fat has to be to survive
because the highly unsaturated fats simply turn
to glue plastic like material
that is totally incompatible with life.
- So what does that do for metabolism?
Like what part of the cellular metabolism
does do PUFAs interfere with?
Like for example along the electron transport chain?
- As soon, when a person eats a seed oil for example
the first thing a highly unsaturated seed oil does
if an animal chews up a flax seed for example
the polyunsaturated fat blocks the digestion
of proteolytic enzymes.
And so it impairs protein digestion
as the very first step in your stomach and intestine.
And then when it gets into the blood
if it reaches your thyroid gland
it inhibits the proteolytic enzyme
which is needed to form thyroid hormone.
And then circulating in the blood
if you ate enough that there's a measurable amount
circulating it keeps the thyroid hormones
from being transported on the blood proteins.
And when it gets into the cells
it blocks the action of thyroid to stimulate respiration.
And so the polyunsaturated fat inhibits respiration
blocks the energy production
and at the same time is starting to degrade
and produce the reactive oxidative fragments
that are toxic to cells.
The circulating polyunsaturated fatty acids in the blood
happen to intensify estrogen actions.
It releases estrogen from binding proteins
making it more active and activates the estrogen receptors
and it imitates the actions of estrogen.
So they are systematically impairing estrogen
impairing the metabolism and shifting the direction
of animal metabolism.
Part of that is the plant's defensive reaction.
The rest of it is just in the nature of energy production
and the fact that these random oxidative reactions
are the opposite of what we need to produce energy.
- From my understanding PUFAs cause our fat cells
to become insulin sensitive and that's not what we want.
We want our fat cells to become insulin resistant.
- Yeah, that's just one of the...
- Yeah, you listed off the many consequences.
Some people have questioned where is the role
of monounsaturated fats in the diet then?
So something like olive oil or avocado.
How does that compare to the PUFAs versus
the saturated fats that you often recommend
such as coconut oil or animal fats?
- When we eat carbohydrates in excess
we make our own saturated fats.
If we are free of the polyunsaturated fats
we can modify a certain percentage of our saturated fats
which we have made from carbohydrates
or saturated fat from chocolate or beef for example.
We can unsaturate midway down the fatty acid molecule
at carbon number nine.
We can start a desaturation process there.
It's nine carbons away from the end
and it's closer to the acidic head end of the fat molecule.
So the acid end makes it safer from oxidation.
So the ones we produce from saturated fats
or carbohydrates are called
the omega minus nine series fatty acids
and those happen to be anti-inflammatory
and are protective against the plant derived
omega minus three or omega minus six fatty acids.
- So are you saying that the omega nines,
that's oleic acid, is that right?
- Yeah, that's the major fat I think in avocados.
It's a major fat and in olive oil for example.
- So did you say that the omega nines
that we get from avocado or olive oil,
those are protective against omega sixes and omega threes
or only the omega nines that we produce in our bodies?
- The ones we produce in our bodies independently
are purely protective and anti-inflammatory.
The trouble with those, olive oil even,
usually contains about 10% of the PUFA
and if you eat more than maybe one or two teaspoons
of olive oil per day, you're at risk of accumulating
that 10% of the highly unsaturated,
which will build up gradually over time
and offset the protective effect of the omega nine.
But if your calorie intake is fairly low
and you don't overeat on olive oil,
then those will be disposed of safely
and the omega nines can then be protective.
- I think that that's a really important point
that not many people talk about
is there are different situations
depending on whether you are eating in a caloric deficit
or eating in a caloric surplus.
It's almost like caloric surpluses
can amplify some of these negative consequences.
- What can amplify them?
- Eating in a caloric surplus,
so eating more calories than what you are burning.
- Yeah, eating excess calories.
These go into storage and build up over time,
remarkably medical literature, not so much the scientific,
but a baby,
now people are saying almost all newborn babies
are deficient in the so-called essential fatty acids.
In fact, the newborn babies oxidative metabolism
and ability to produce energy quickly
and to build tissue,
it's at an extremely high rate,
much higher than ever again in life,
the first few months of a baby's life.
It's consuming oxygen at an extremely high rate
per unit of tissue
and that's exactly because of the absence
of the polyunsaturated fats
and if it eats a so-called formula
containing the so-called essential fatty acids,
it very quickly starts to suppress
its cellular metabolism using oxygen.
The accumulation of polyunsaturated fats
goes on steadily from,
as soon as it's exposed to them,
especially with a synthetic formula containing PUFA,
that goes on steadily
and slows the metabolic rate progressively.
If you look at a chart
graphing the consumption of oxygen per tissue,
it's at a very high point at the beginning
and an extremely low point
at reaching zero at old age and death.
So it's a progressive aging process
and energy losing process of the tissue
exactly in proportion to the accumulation
of polyunsaturated fats with time.
- Thinking of the way that we grew up
and the way that we ate growing up,
I can't even imagine how many PUFAs we've accumulated
throughout the years.
One of the essential foods
or the foods that you would recommend
for somebody to consume, you mentioned fish.
So were you talking about like white fish
or do you have any role in your diet
for fish that are high in the essential fatty acids
such as something like salmon or salmon roe?
So maybe cold water versus warm water fish as well.
- Salmon is terrible
because of its high content of polyunsaturated fats.
The desirable ones, if you can't eat tropical fish,
like in the Amazon River where the water is very warm,
fish fat is just about as saturated as butter fat.
So it's much safer,
but in the cold water fish,
you can select those with a very low body fat content.
And so cod and sole, for example,
are much better than salmon.
- So I know a lot of people question then
like how did the Inuits get by
with very little health problems
when they were eating a diet high in cold water fish?
Do you have any insight on this point?
- It's a very harmful diet.
If you have a high metabolic rate
and are able to oxidize the fats as fast as you eat them,
they won't accumulate at a dangerous rate.
But if you're fairly sedentary
and are intending to add a little fat every day,
you're going to run into all of the accumulated
pro-inflammatory oxidative conditions
with time and the accumulation of these in your tissues.
There are many people claiming that since the brain contains
a high level of the omega minus three polyunsaturated fats,
that they are necessary for the brain.
Somehow the baby at birth doesn't contain them.
And supposedly, if they're necessary for the brain,
the baby would develop a fully normal,
extremely functional brain without them.
And in fact, if you look at the brain in dementia,
these polyunsaturated fats are accumulating
in a form bound to cholesterol.
So that in proportion to dementia,
the brain contains the omega minus three fatty acids.
The whole story to promote their sale of fish oil
is basically cricket.
It's advertising without science
or with the reverse upside down science.
They are immunosuppressive.
They knock out your white blood cell function.
And the oxidative breakdown products
are what is causing the damage.
And that suppression of the immune system,
if you're killing your white blood cells
during several months period,
they can have an anti-inflammatory function.
But eventually you're going to want to have
some living white blood cells,
even at the expense of having inflammation.
And the long range effect
is that you've weakened your immune system.
And it happens that the oxidative breakdown products
are supportive to the formation of antibodies,
but not to the function of thymus cells
and the other necessary components of the immune system.
And it happens that estrogen excess
biases the immune system in the same way,
leading towards emphasis on antibodies,
but not on the basic white blood cell
based part of the immune system.
- Interesting.
So to be honest, like a few years ago,
we certainly thought that these were essential fatty acids.
Do you have any resources that you would suggest
someone to read through to kind of maybe get them thinking
that maybe these aren't essential fatty acids?
There's been so much propaganda for the benefits of these
and that we need to consume them in a diet.
What resources would you point people to
to show that, hey, there's actually potential downsides
to consuming these?
- Someone recently sent me their draft
of an extremely good, very readable book
on the polyunsaturated fats.
And it has, I think, a thousand references,
so it can function as a textbook,
but it's also just entertaining and readable.
And it's going to be published imminently,
but it isn't available right now.
And I can tell you later where to find it.
I don't have the information right now.
- Okay, you'll have to send it,
or we'll come back and talk about that.
- Yeah, so stay tuned.
That book will be coming soon.
- Okay, so moving on to a slightly controversial topic
in the keto and carnivore community.
Can you make the case for sugar?
So not saying that sugar is going to provide you
with a ton of nutrients,
but what role do you see sugar playing in someone's diet?
- If you have a highly digestible starch,
it quickly breaks down into glucose,
and then it can provide very safe energy
and can make saturated fats as needed.
But many starches are hard to digest,
and for someone with sluggish digestion,
starches tend to support bacterial overgrowth
in the intestine.
So a person has to take into account
the quality of their digestion
when they're considering what to eat.
So vegetables are fine
when your digestive system is working well.
But if you have digestive limitations
and a tendency to bacterial overgrowth
or slow peristalsis or nocturnal reflux,
lots of the common symptoms are made worse by starches.
And in that case, a low-starch fruit,
such as the citrus fruit,
can be a perfect source of carbohydrates.
And you need some kind of carbohydrate
to safely metabolize fats and proteins.
And any cooked vegetable will work for most people,
but some people have to be very selective
and pick out certain vegetables
that they're sure are going to produce inflammation
and bacterial overgrowth.
- So to summarize, basically,
you're kind of saying that sugar is just easy, fast energy,
and so it doesn't cause negative effects of,
for example, digestion problems
that maybe it would cause
if someone had to break down,
like what's an example, like sweet potato.
Some people may have a problem breaking that sweet potato
or other vegetables to get their energy.
And so sugar can play a role
in just providing fast energy
that can access the cells quickly.
Is that right?
- Yeah, and it doesn't require digestion,
so it can start absorbing right in your stomach
and immediately in your upper intestine.
And even if you have a perfectly digestible starch,
the starch has the same quick reaction
that pure glucose does,
and so it's a powerful stimulant to insulin.
And so if you eat a little too much glucose or starch,
it activates insulin secretion
and will turn the excess sugar into fat.
And the insulin can then,
if you have other nutritional limitations,
the sudden surge of insulin from glucose or starch,
after turning on fat production,
it lowers your blood sugar,
and that can cause stress reactions.
And the difference between sucrose,
the common sugar in fruits,
is that it's only 50% glucose,
so it doesn't have the isomeric reaction
that a digestible starch has.
It's only half as able to stimulate insulin
because it's only half glucose.
And then the fructose component of the molecule
actually has a mild insulin inhibiting effect.
So it provides the sugar energy
much more gradually than starch does.
And it tends to avoid the glucose,
insulin, hypoglycemia stress reaction
that a highly digestible starch doesn't cause.
- So a lot of the anti-fructose arguments
bring up the point that fructose consumption
doesn't spike insulin,
and so therefore you should stay below a certain threshold
or else it will automatically lead to fat gain, for example.
So where are a lot of these anti-fructose arguments
coming from?
Is it some relation to PUFAs?
Where is that argument
of it automatically leads to fat storage?
- Naturally, if you overeat on fat,
or protein, or starch, or sucrose,
you're gonna get fat.
(laughing)
The anti-sugar argument really started back in the '50s.
And they were having the idea
of overeating sugar would stimulate
first hypoglycemia and then adrenaline.
All of the typical hypoglycemia arguments
which simply are making extreme conclusions
from a few experiments.
But when you have sucrose with a mixed diet,
it's actually a stabilizing effect
rather than a destabilizing effect,
which the early arguments were making.
But then an English doctor, John Yitken,
wrote a book and said,
"Wait, sugar, if you eat an excess of sugar,
"it turns to saturated fat."
And the anti-cholesterol, anti-fat argument
that was promoted to sell vegetable oil
had sold the idea of saturated fat
as the cause of heart disease.
And John Yitken said,
"Wait, sugar causes saturated fat to rise,
"and so sugar is the cause of heart disease."
So he had a doubly wrong argument.
But that book was very popular starting in the 1970s,
and persisted, and then I think it was largely,
I think his name is Robert Lustig,
a professor of pediatrics in San Francisco,
made some even stranger arguments,
saying that fructose is like,
it's as toxic as alcohol.
And that he, in his famous video,
showed a lot of references
on the blue screen in the background.
And I looked up some of his references,
and once I looked up,
it didn't support his argument at all.
In fact, fructose is a very powerful,
specific antidote to ethanol poisoning.
Absolutely to reverse what he says.
And the reason is,
ethanol, like a high-fat diet,
shifts the electronic balance
of the cell metabolism
in the direction of too many electrons,
a reducing state.
It's an antidote to fat metabolism poisoning,
and starvation.
The extreme of the ketogenic principle,
when you form ketone bodies,
by starving yourself for sugar,
you're mobilizing fat metabolism,
and putting yourself in a high-reducing state.
The opposite of what fructose does to the cell.
- That is a very interesting argument
that our audience will not like,
but we like to challenge our views
and challenge everyone's views.
So, appreciate you sharing.
Now we have a follow-up on the sugar.
- Yeah, so considering we came from a keto
and then carnivore, zero-carb diet,
what is the best way for somebody
to start incorporating sugar
after they have starved for their bodies from it
for quite some time?
- Or carbs, yeah.
I don't think it's a matter of having
to work gradually into it.
A dose of sugar, as long as it isn't grossly excessive,
will be the first best antidote to the poisoning
that you have been experiencing.
In an extreme state of the reducing diet
or the starvation condition,
the ketones derived from outside your body
are actually a good, safe energy source.
So if you get ketones from fruits and vegetables,
those are just like sugar,
they're protective and start the repair process
of lowering the stress hormones,
getting you out of the reducing stress condition,
starting up the cellular oxidation again.
And either the ketones from the outside,
found in vegetables and fruits or sugars,
are the essential thing
for getting your oxidative metabolism going again.
- So what do you say to someone who says,
well, in the past, like our ancestors,
they didn't have access to carbohydrates,
and so they were certainly fat-fueled,
like they relied on animal meat and animal fats.
- Well, if you look at primates,
fruits, it happens that the longest-lived
in proportion to body size primate is the squirrel monkey.
They have a pure fruit diet,
and they're the size of a squirrel,
but they live an average of 30 years,
which for their body sizes is a very long time.
And brain development is in proportion
to the amount of sugar that can be provided
to the developing nerve tissue.
It requires sugar energy.
It's a very high oxidizing tissue,
and that oxidation has to be based
on sugar, on glucose specifically.
And to develop a brain,
the primates have to have a relatively high
carbohydrate diet.
Chimpanzees don't get as much carbohydrate
as the fruit-eating monkeys,
and for their body size,
they aren't especially either long-lived or intelligent.
The squirrel monkey has a huge brain
in proportion to its body size.
Chimpanzees and gorillas have relatively small brains.
- So someone would then make the argument
that homo sapiens are quite different than chimpanzees.
So for example, vitamin B12 in the gut digestive tract,
so just example of some of the differences.
So someone could argue that we are
drastically different from them.
And so is there any evidence from our early lineage
that carbohydrates were beneficial as opposed to ketosis?
- There is fossil evidence
that the isotopes can be interpreted
to show the importance of carbohydrate
in brain development.
For example, one of the African
precursors of homo sapiens
lived on a type of giant grass,
sort of like sugar cane.
They had specially developed molars
for mashing the sugary juice
out of this reed along the Nile River.
And they had very well-developed brains.
So many of the arguments are extremely ideological.
They have an idea of what they think
human beings should be.
And so they have shaped their evidence
basically to fit the argument.
- And I've heard you say many times
that our environment right now is very different
than environment of early homo sapiens,
where we face a lot more stress from, for example,
like 5G and other sorts of life stresses
like pollution, et cetera.
So I think that that's something to think about
for the audience as well,
is like potentially our needs as human species now
is different than it was X years ago.
Is that true of what you kind of believe?
- Yeah, in just the last 50 years
in the United States in particular,
but all around the Northern Hemisphere,
conditions have radically changed.
For example, in 1963,
there was a competitive hydrogen bomb testing spree
in both Soviet Union and the United States
that loaded the whole atmosphere of the Northern Hemisphere
with immense amounts of radioactive isotopes.
So starting in 1963,
babies were exposed
to brain damaging amounts of radiation
concentrated in the uterus
and affecting brain development.
And roughly in the same generation,
the vaccination mania was instituted,
especially in the United States,
rising to a horrible peak
of something like 60 vaccinations per child
in recent decades.
So these terrible environmental influences
have become universal
and have to be taken into account.
And radiation damage, for example,
is amplified by polyunsaturated fats
and by estrogens.
In fact, estrogen and polyunsaturated fats
synergize in tissue damage
with ionizing radiation.
Their effects are essentially similar
and overlapping and synergistic.
- So there's just some things
we cannot control in our environment,
but we can control our diet.
So I just have one more follow-up question
on the sugar and the carbs.
What would you say to somebody
who has type 1 or type 2 diabetes?
'Cause I know that you definitely do prefer
our main fuel source, tuby carbs,
but so many people seem to be going
to a low-carb diet to manage these conditions.
- The first thing to consider is
what do they mean that they have type 1
or type 2 diabetes?
For 50 years or more,
I've been talking to people who've had that diagnosis
and I asked them how it was diagnosed.
You, in principle, can't diagnose type 1
without actually doing a blood test for insulin.
But out of hundreds of people I've talked to,
only half a dozen or so actually had their insulin measured,
but they were immediately treated for diabetes
without a rational diagnosis.
For cancer or diabetes or anything,
first step is to understand what was meant.
Was the blood glucose the basis for the diagnosis?
In kids, that's often all that's measured.
The most common cause for high glucose
is stress causing unopposed cortisol secretion.
So if you don't measure for either insulin or cortisol,
you might be doing exactly the wrong treatment
to lower cortisol.
Sugar is the most powerful treatment.
And two doctors in France and England
in the late 19th century
were curing terminal diabetic patients
that they would eat a normal meal,
lots of protein, for example,
but their muscles were wasting away
even when they didn't eat sugar.
They would eat steak, for example.
It would show up in their urine as very high glucose
and their body was disappearing week by week
but when they fed them 12 ounces a day
of ordinary white sugar
as well as a standard meat and potatoes diet,
they recovered.
- Wow.
I heard Matt Blackburn talking about these studies
and how they were removed from scientific literature,
like access to them,
but he said he just bought a book on Amazon
from the British literature of medicine,
I don't know, some year, 1860 something,
and he now has access to those studies.
So it'll be interesting for him to post those.
So you have seen those studies?
- So I haven't seen that book.
- Okay.
But it's interesting
'cause that's just not talked about anymore.
So I think it's an interesting perspective
that maybe someone should consider.
But moving on to the final nutrition question that we have,
and this was a very popular question from our audience.
So Dr. Peat, let's say that you were about 50
or 60 pounds overweight,
what would you do to lose weight?
- First, stop eating for a while
and then go on a low-fat milk and cheese diet
with a little bit of orange juice
and an occasional egg and oyster.
Calcium and vitamin D
are supportive of the thyroid hormone.
It's good to check your thyroid hormone and vitamin D
if you're at all overweight
because a deficiency of those is extremely common
and slows the metabolism.
A high PUFA intake will suppress your vitamin D metabolism
as well as your thyroid metabolism.
So making sure those are good.
And you want to lower the phosphate in your diet
relative to calcium.
And so milk and cheese as a staple of your diet
will tremendously increase your heat production
and energy metabolism, oxygen consumption,
and make it much easier to lose weight.
And then the foods, moderate amounts of egg,
shellfish such as oysters,
and some orange juice will provide essential nutrients
and anti-inflammatory things
that support your background metabolism.
- I think that's great.
That's like the first time I've heard somebody
describe a weight loss diet
that isn't purely focused on calories,
but instead focused on still getting
the necessary nutrients that your organs need
to function optimally.
But would you still say that calories still do matter?
He said, yeah, like so eat less.
- Yeah, but the difference is that
a person who has been dieting
very often will be burning calories
at a rate of seven or 800 calories per day.
And so they get fat on just a few snacks.
But when you shift over,
making sure your vitamin D and thyroid are okay,
but shift over to a high calcium to phosphate ratio
in your diet, not much meat, not much ordinary fish,
but enough shellfish for the trace minerals.
The high calcium phosphate ratio
and high protein relative to fat
with the rest of it carbohydrate enough
so that you handle the protein
and fat metabolism without stress.
That will very quickly increase your calorie consumption
from seven or 800 a day up to the normal 2000 per day,
making it tremendously easier to lose weight.
And as you stay out of the stress condition,
your muscles are going to recover.
You'll put on weight in the form of muscle
as part of your ability to burn 1000 or 1500 calories
per day.
So your muscles are then going to take over
to continuing weight regulation.
- So in terms of increasing the metabolic rate,
can we cover potentially some supplements
that would be able to help that?
What supplements do you think are beneficial
that we still can get in foods,
but we may benefit from having more, supplementing more?
- You get all of your trace minerals from the seafoods,
especially shellfish.
And if eggs and milk aren't producing enough vitamins,
you can occasionally add a little bit of liver
into your diet, which will have both trace minerals
and vitamins in abundance.
So liver and oysters,
you can think of them as your supplements.
Have one serving of those per week.
And it's much better than a hundred hours a month
spent on supplements and much safer
because there is no supplement on the market
that isn't contaminated with manufacturing debris,
basically stuff that can't be kept out
of the chemical processes.
- So you emphasized vitamin D earlier in this conversation.
So what about somebody who maybe in their winter months
can't get as much sun?
Would you still advise against supplementing with vitamin D?
- Yeah, but only in a proper safe vehicle.
It's available in pure olive oil,
sulfate capsules and drops both.
- One other question about supplements.
I know you recommend aspirin a lot,
and I know there's a lot of information out there
on how you feel about aspirin.
Could you just clarify who you think
should be taking aspirin,
if it's for everybody or a certain condition?
- Everyone, even on a good diet,
milk for example,
1% milk has still a small amount of PUFA.
3% of the fat roughly is highly unsaturated.
And we're all tending at different rates
to accumulate polyunsaturated fats in our tissues.
And so with aging, aspirin becomes a defensive material.
Since we have the PUFA in our tissues,
any little stress is going to lead it to break down
into these inflammatory things such as prostaglandins.
And so in proportion to your tissue load,
which varies with your diet and age,
aspirin can be very protective.
Vitamin E has similar anti-inflammatory aspirin-like actions.
- Okay, yeah, we just added in some vitamin E
to protect against some of these things.
- I haven't done the aspirin yet.
- Yeah.
- So when you do the aspirin,
you just take like one pill a day,
or is it a certain dose per week that you would recommend?
- I think once a person is over 50 or 60,
a standard pill per day is fine
as long as they are sure to keep their vitamin K level up.
If your vitamin K level is low,
you'll bleed very easily and aspirin will intensify that.
But if you have a good vitamin K intake
from liver and aged cheese, for example,
then the aspirin is not going to increase
your bleeding risk.
- Okay, that's an important note.
So we kind of wanted to dive in a little bit more
about some underlying questions we still have
about female hormones in fertility,
because I know you put so much work into this topic,
which I think is just incredible.
So first question,
it kind of goes along the lines of our journey.
What is your opinion on a low carb diet
or fasting for female hormones?
- For what?
- For female hormones,
like the implications that following a prolonged low carb diet
or doing prolonged fasts could have
on female hormones in fertility.
- Very harmful.
Fasting increases your free fatty acids going too long
without food.
And if you're in very good health,
you can stand at least eight hours without stress.
But the lower your reserves are,
more often you should replenish your carbohydrates.
Going for a long time without carbohydrates
or total fasting,
your free fatty acids will increase in your blood.
And the presence of free fatty acids,
as the glucose decreases,
the balance of free fatty acid
turns off the ability to oxidize glucose,
blocks the ability to process pyruvic acid.
to process pyruvic acid
to carbon dioxide production.
And instead of turning the carbon dioxide,
the pyruvic acid turns into lactic acid.
And the lactic acid is responsible
for shifting the electron balance of the whole system.
So once your blood balance
between free fatty acids and glucose
reaches a dominance of fat,
your lactic acid level automatically goes up
and that shifts your whole body
into the stress, reducing stress condition.
And that means that you have an instantly diabetic
or cancer-like metabolism.
Diabetes metabolism is just a way
of describing the long range effect
of not enough sugar being metabolized
because we mobilize fat in proportion
to a loss of glucose.
Mobilizing fat blocks the use of pyruvic acid,
therefore increases lactic acid.
Lactic acid turns on that whole system
known as the cancer metabolism
or the diabetes metabolism or the inflammatory metabolism.
All of those conditions are really instantaneous expressions
of the absence of glucose.
And when they become a disease,
it's because that process has been continued too long.
- So it's hard to deny some of the success stories
that you have heard from some people coming from,
I don't know if it was more of a carb-based
or just more standard American diet
that was higher in PUFA.
A lot of people have,
some women have regained their period
and have lost weight and have felt better
by going to a lower carb or zero carb diet.
Can you explain potentially what would happen?
- What that usually means,
they'll sometimes cure insomnia or epilepsy
or lots of things.
Now what it usually means
is they've been eating the standard Western diet,
bread, legumes, processed foods,
of various starchy and oily composition.
And very often they'll increase their consumption
of meat and fish and eggs and cheese, for example.
They see it as a decrease of carbohydrate,
but what it usually amounts to in the United States
is a reduction of toxic foods.
- A reduction of PUFAs
and then they're increasing the amount of nutrients
they're getting from things like meat and eggs and dairy.
- Yeah, meat and cheese and eggs, for example,
don't contain inflammatory materials,
such as the average pasta and bread-containing diet.
- A large reason some people do lose their periods is PCOS.
What do you recommend for somebody with PCOS?
- Vitamin D and calcium would be the first thing,
and then checking thyroid function.
- Okay, so similar to the losing of the weight.
- Yeah, and vitamin D deficiency
is now a very commonly recognized cause.
But experimentally, 50 years ago,
they could produce it in animals
by making them hypothyroid
and giving them a glenadal stimulation
to increase their estrogen.
So the estrogen, if they're low thyroid,
they can turn cholesterol into progesterone.
And if they're at the same time stimulated with estrogen,
the adrenal glands become overactive
and start producing the androgens
and the whole system shifts,
but increasing the metabolic rate,
the ability to use oxygen by increasing vitamin D
and calcium along with thyroid
can break you out of that cycle.
- Cool, so why do you recommend females and also males
to monitor their temperature and pulse?
So what is your goal tracking those?
What do those markers say
and what should we look for for those values?
- If you take your temperature and pulse rate
when you first wake up
and then sometime later in the day,
you'll learn many, many things.
A very hypothyroid or nutrient deficient person
will have extreme stress hormones during the night,
but not enough thyroid hormone and calcium and vitamin D
to maintain their metabolic rate.
And so what happens is high cortisol
will turn your protein, good tissues
into the essential glucose that you need.
It's like starvation or a ketogenic diet.
The high cortisol takes over
to provide the essential amount of glucose.
And so high cortisol becomes extreme around dawn
and your waking temperature will be abnormally high
even though your metabolic rate oxidatively is low.
And then if you eat breakfast,
have some orange juice for example,
and your pulse slows and your temperature falls,
that shows that it was cortisol
causing the high market temperature.
So a falling pulse with food is an anti-stress sign.
And when you get your night stress hormones down
by eating a more balanced diet with adequate carbohydrate,
then if you have a very low morning temperature
and you're slow to rise to 98.6 or 37 Celsius,
if you don't quickly get up to the functional temperature,
that's a typical low thyroid sign.
In the absence of extreme night stress,
your waking temperature might be 95 or 96 degrees Fahrenheit
or it should be not far below 98 degrees at waking.
- So it's a good way to measure
the functioning of your thyroid.
- Yeah, and also very often of your cortisol.
- Okay, what about somebody who is waking up
very frequently throughout the night to go pee?
Is that a sign of high cortisol?
- Yeah, sometimes just increased calcium and vitamin D
will take care of that.
Other times thyroid is responsible.
- Okay, great.
So if someone has a lot of thyroid problems,
do you ever recommend specific thyroid tests
or potentially thyroid supplementation?
- Yeah, the morning temperature and pulse rate check
is extremely effective,
but it's good to have a backup blood test.
Healthy people, I've never seen anyone
without some of the hypothyroid signs and symptoms.
If their TSH was very much above 1.0,
where the normal range goes all the way up to 4 or 5.0.
And they say it's abnormal to be below 0.4
at the low end of the range on the TSH.
But when people have looked at a big population
and the frequency of thyroid problems,
such as especially thyroid cancer,
they found that areas where people
have no higher than 0.4,
where everyone was below normal on their TSH,
meaning by the medical definition
that they would be hyperthyroid.
Those people were free of thyroid cancer.
And what that means is that the chronic cumulative exposure
of the thyroid gland to the TSH pituitary hormone,
that is carcinogenic, leads to decomposition,
formation of nodules in the gland,
and ultimately a risk of thyroid cancer.
So it's very good to know what your TSH is,
even though the doctor's going to tell you
it's perfectly normal to have 2 or 3 or 4.0 on the test.
If you also had your cholesterol measured,
in a large population, the cholesterol rises
exactly as TSH rises.
And so as you improve your diet or supplement thyroid
to reduce other symptoms, such as ovarian reproductive
problems, as your TSH goes down,
your cholesterol approaches normal,
decreases along with the TSH.
- Okay.
So considering this is all about the thyroid,
what would be the number one thing you'd recommend
for somebody to start improving the function
of their thyroid if that TSH--
- Cutting out all the unfeterated fats.
- Right on.
Okay, that seems to be the general theme
with your nutrition.
Okay, let's see here.
One final question about the hormones.
Should women approach nutrition differently
from their fertile years to post-menopausal years?
- Recognizing that the menopause is reflecting
primarily a failure in your ability to make progesterone,
and that that leaves all of the cells of your body
under increased stress,
tending to cause them to begin producing estrogen.
So menopause is a condition of increased estrogen exposure
and symptoms.
And for example, post-menopausal women are the ones
who are susceptible to sickness from the coronavirus.
Menstruating women are much, much less likely
to have any symptoms from the virus.
- And would you say that's because of progesterone?
- Progesterone can be supplemented,
but the important thing is to watch your thyroid function
and your nutrition, and use your cholesterol levels,
for example, as one of the indicators
of what's going on with your progesterone and estrogen.
- So if we connect all these dots,
the best thing you could do for all of this,
including coronavirus,
is to significantly reduce your intake of PUFAS.
- Oh, yeah.
- The cholesterol connection is very interesting
because I have had high cholesterol
for quite a long time now, and I also have amenorrhea,
and I kind of never made that connection
that I have a lot of extra cholesterol in my body
because my body is not properly converting it into hormones.
You kind of forget that cholesterol,
I sometimes forget that cholesterol
is used to produce these hormones.
And so it's interesting that cholesterol will drop
as your hormone-producing capabilities improve.
And so I'm curious when I test my cholesterol again,
once I get my period back,
I'm curious what the level will be then.
- In an experiment, someone isolated an ovary
and measured in the vein coming out
the amount of progesterone,
and then they varied the amount of cholesterol
in the artery going into the ovary.
And as they increased the amount of cholesterol
in the blood, the amount of progesterone
coming out of the ovary directly increased.
- Very interesting.
- An increase of cholesterol in hypothyroidism
is exactly because your body needs it
to make up for the fact that progesterone,
thyroid is the essential factor
for making the conversion of cholesterol to progesterone.
- Okay, and typically will carb diets
increase your cholesterol?
- Yeah, I certainly, my cholesterol was a lot higher
when I was on zero carb, got up to like 490.
And I don't know, a lot of people
in the keto carnivore space,
I even said this, ketone production
and cholesterol production, LDL cholesterol production
are on the same pathway.
And so if you increase your ketone production,
you will automatically increase
your LDL production as well.
So it's just interesting that you see higher cholesterol
in some of these individuals who are low carb, zero carb.
I was certainly one of those, what was it called?
- Hyper-
- Lean mass hyper-responder.
- If your liver is under extreme stress,
its ability to make cholesterol can begin to fail.
And so it's much worse to be deficient
in blood cholesterol than to be excessive in it.
The increase in cholesterol shows that you're adapting,
your liver is able to help your ovaries
and adrenals make the steroids.
- That's really interesting.
- If your liver is in trouble,
then you can't make enough cholesterol.
- That's really interesting
'cause it seems like there's a group of individuals
who have normal cholesterol levels
and then a group of individuals
who have higher cholesterol levels.
And like I said, this was called
like the lean mass hyper-responder group.
And so potentially the difference between those two groups
is potentially the liver functionality.
- If someone is deficient,
for sure it's the liver that's the main problem.
- Over the age of 50,
a big study in aging people
found that if you didn't have
well over 200 level of cholesterol
in your older years,
your likelihood of being dependent was greatly increased
because the anti-stress progesterone and so on
is essential for protecting the brain.
And if you're under 200 cholesterol and in your 50s,
then you're in serious trouble.
- Yeah, there seems to be some sort of like,
the argument is there's a like a protective effect
for LDL cholesterol, it's wrongly demonized.
- Right, right.
And estrogen and many toxic substances
are known to lower the good LDL cholesterol
and increase the HDL.
So poisoning can cause what the doctors consider
a healthy shift.
- So we're at an hour and a half now.
And so we don't wanna take up more of your time.
We'll have to get you back on another time.
We've really enjoyed discussing with you
and kind of digging into some of these topics.
What are the best resources people can go to
to learn the basics of your approach,
such as like a website or a newsletter?
- Yeah, my website is rayPeate.com.
- And can people subscribe to your newsletter
on your website?
- No, but you can get the information about subscribing
at rayPeate's newsletter at gmail.com.
- Okay.
- So if you made it this far,
thank you for hanging out with us
and watching this video of us.
I hope that you had some takeaways
and challenged some of your beliefs.
Many of you all likely disagreed with some of his things
and that is okay.
We all agree to disagree.
So like we said, if you have any more questions
for Dr. Ray P, make sure you hit him in the comments below
and we hope to be able to have him on again
for another great discussion
where you can just stare at us while he talks.
It's great.
But until next time, you guys,
make sure you are behaving like an angel.
Make sure you are behaving like an angel